    Title: Use `uv` for managing dependencies / local development
    Owner: samuel.williams@communities.gov.uk
    Collaborator(s):
    Created on: 2024-10-31
    Status: Accepted
    Finalised on: 2024-11-11

# Overview

This proposal discusses moving from a few different tools for managing our Python ecosystem (mostly locally) to a single tool, `uv`.

# What is the current state?

Currently, we use a number of tools to manage dependencies and local development:

* `pip` for installing dependencies
* `pip-tools` for compiling/locking dependencies
* `pyenv` for managing python versions

`pip` is fairly slow at installing dependencies and does not have the most friendly developer experience. `uv` is a modern tool that aims to improve developer experience and run fast. It has functionality to replace all three of these tools in one go.

# Why should we change?

* Make it easier to add/remove/edit dependencies.
* Have a faster, more streamlined developer experience - including onboarding/setup.
* Stay up to date with the Python ecosystem, eg [PEP 735](https://peps.python.org/pep-0735/) which adds the concept of "dependency groups".

Managing dependencies locally is a somewhat slow and annoying process, due to:

* `pip`'s CLI not having very user-friendly options
* `pip`'s dependency resolver being slow and emitting less friendly error messages on failure
* Needing to manage virtual environments manually (creating them, keeping them in sync, etc)

# How should we address this?

`uv` is an actively-maintained tool managed by [astral.sh](https://astral.sh/), which has been working hard to improve the Python ecosystem. We use one of their other tools, `ruff`, to manage linting and formatting of parts of the Funding Service (mainly post award - but likely to be everything soon).

`uv` runs so quickly that it will generally run an automatic create+sync before any command you run, so you don't need to manually do nearly as much to manage your local environments. This goes for installing the correct pre-compiled python binary for your application as well.

`uv` uses `pyproject.toml` to store top-level dependencies, and manages both core and dev dependencies in a PEP-compliant format there. It supports extras (eg for utils) and dependency groups (eg for dev dependencies) consistently.

| Task | old command | new command |
| --- | --- | --- |
| Setting up for the first time | `pyenv install 3.10 && python3.10 -m venv .venv && source .venv/bin/activate && pip install -r requirements-dev.txt`| `uv sync` |
| Compiling/locking the dependency tree | `pip-compile requirements.in && pip-compile requirements-dev.in` |uv lock  |
| Adding/removing a dependency | manually edit `requirements[-dev].in` && pip-compile requirements.in && pip-compile requirements-dev.in | `uv add/remove --dev <package>` |
| Updating a package | manually edit `requirements[-dev].in` && pip-compile requirements.in && pip-compile requirements-dev.in | `uv lock -P <package>` |
| Installing a python version | `pyenv install 3.10` | `uv python install 3.10` (but you shouldn't need to manually do this) |

We will need to do migrate the existing `.in` files into `pyproject.toml`. I prepared a couple of commands that can do this for a given repo by setting `requirements.txt` as a constraints file, and then doing `uv add --requirements requirements.in`. And the same for `requirements-dev.in`.

# What alternatives are we discarding?

There are a number of ways of managing dependencies for python projects:

* `pip-tools` - stay as we are
* [`poetry`](https://python-poetry.org/)
* [`pipenv`](https://pipenv.pypa.io/en/latest/)
* [`pdm`](https://pdm-project.org/en/latest/)

These all address the "dependencies" part of the process, but only `pdm` also manages python installation locally. Poetry and pipenv use slower dependency resolution that makes managing dependencies more annoying than it needs to be.

# Who will be affected?

This will affect all developers, who will need to switch over to and learn how to use `uv` and what the equivalents are for any commands they use locally.

# What are the key risks to manage or mitigate?

The risks with switching out a tool here are minimal. We can maintain backwards compatibility with pip by exporting `uv` lockfile to a standard `requirements.txt` file, which pip/etc could still use directly.

## Dependabot

Dependabot does not currently know how to update `uv.lock` files. [Renovate](https://docs.renovatebot.com/) does. We could consider switching to that. Or we could use `uv export requirements.txt` to export `uv.lock` to a standard requirements file that Dependabot understands, and then have actions that run on Dependabot PRs which manage updating our uv lock file.

## Paketo

Paketo does not understand `uv.lock` files. We can keep a `requirements.txt` using `uv export`, and then nothing would need to change with Paketo or our deployment process. Alternatively, we could write a custom Paketo buildpack that runs the `uv sync` command (probably not recommended).

